Add vite blog article (#115)
ddev/ddev.com: src/content/blog/working-with-ddev-and-vite.md

---
title: "Working with Vite and DDEV - an introduction"
pubDate: 2023-10-28
modifiedDate: 2023-10-28
summary: How to work with Vite in DDEV?
author: Matthias Andrasch
featureImage:
  src: /img/blog/2023/08/contributors-working.png
  alt: Contributors working together on DDEV
categories:
  - Community
---

> ## Working with DDEV and vite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using Vite with DDEV
```

Vite is a popular web development tool that serves your JavaScript and CSS code in a clever way: Instead of bundling everything like webpack, it uses a technique called "hot module reloading". This enables the ability to instantly update and show your changes in the browser while you're working on your project. 

> How can we use Vite within DDEV?
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This articles sums up my current personal experience. I hope it will be a helpful  introduction to get started working with Vite and DDEV. 

Vite is written in NodeJS. 

DDEV already has built-in support for [NodeJS](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/usage/cli/#nodejs-npm-nvm-and-yarn). 

> You can set the NodeJS version in `.ddev/config.yaml` for each project ([docs](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/configuration/config/#nodejs_version)):
> 
> ```
> nodejs_version: "18"
> ```

Reviewer: Is it important to say this? I would probably suggest removing it, as more-or-less off-topic?

```suggestion
```

In order to use Vite in our DDEV projects, we need to do two things:

> 1. Expose Vites development server port (default: `5173`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Expose Vite's development server port (default: `5173`)
```

2. Adjust the Vite config to use DDEVs project URL, e.g. `https://test-vite.ddev.site:5173`.

### A simple example

Let's try it out with a simple example project. We will use Vite v4 for this. 

First we create a new DDEV project called `test-vite`: 

```

> mkdir test-vite
> cd test-vite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mkdir test-vite && cd test-vite
```

ddev config --project-type=php
ddev start
```

We create a simple package.json file for this tutorial. 

> _For more advanced examples, check out Vites guide [Scaffolding Your First Vite Project](https://vitejs.dev/guide/#scaffolding-your-first-vite-project)._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_For more advanced examples, check out Vite's guide [Scaffolding Your First Vite Project](https://vitejs.dev/guide/#scaffolding-your-first-vite-project)._
```

> A quick reminder: Every npm command needs to be executed within the DDEV Docker containers for the project. Therefore we always need to use `ddev npm` (or `ddev yarn`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A quick reminder: Every npm command needs to be executed within the DDEV web container, so we use `ddev npm` (or `ddev yarn`).
```

Let's create a simple package.json file:

```bash
ddev npm init -y
```

Afterwards we install [Vite](https://www.npmjs.com/package/vite) as development dependency:

```bash
ddev npm i vite --save-dev
```

We add these script commands to the package.json:

```json
  "scripts": {
    "dev": "vite",
    "build": "vite build",
    "preview": "vite preview"
  },
```

An we also need to add the type property:

```json

> type: "module"

Reviewer 2: Needs quotes (and comma) to be valid.

```suggestion
"type": "module",
```

```

The final `package.json` is as follows:

```json
{
  "name": "vite-starter",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "index.js",
  "type": "module",
  "scripts": {
    "dev": "vite",
    "build": "vite build",
    "preview": "vite preview"
  },
  "keywords": [],
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC",
  "devDependencies": {
    "vite": "^4.5.0"
  }
}
```

Now Vite is almost ready to go. But there is one important step ahead of us.

> ### 1. Expose the vite port

Reviewer: Shouldn't this just be 
```suggestion
### Expose the vite port
```

Why? 

If you use Vite on your localhost (without DDEV), the Vite development server would be accessible at `http://localhost:5173/`.

Now we need it make it accessible via `https://test-vite.ddev.site:5173`.

Fortunately exposing the port is very simple with DDEV's config option [web_extra_exposed_ports](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/extend/customization-extendibility/#exposing-extra-ports-via-ddev-router). We add the following to `.ddev/config.yaml` file: 

```yaml
web_extra_exposed_ports:
  - name: vite
    container_port: 5173
    http_port: 5172
    https_port: 5173
```

This is our resulting `.ddev/config.yaml` file:

```yaml
name: test-vite
type: php
docroot: ""
php_version: "8.1"
webserver_type: nginx-fpm
xdebug_enabled: false
additional_hostnames: []
additional_fqdns: []
database:
    type: mariadb
    version: "10.4"
use_dns_when_possible: true
composer_version: "2"
web_environment: []
nodejs_version: "18"
web_extra_exposed_ports:
  - name: vite
    container_port: 5173
    http_port: 5172
    https_port: 5173
```

A `ddev restart` is necessary after changing the config.yaml file.

You can check the exposed ports with `ddev describe` after the restart.

> _Note: In other projects you might come across docker-compose-files in the .ddev/-folder which also take care of exposing the vite port. If you use `web_extra_exposed_ports`, you don't need these files._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Note: In other tutorials or projects you may come across docker-compose-files in the .ddev/-folder which also take care of exposing the vite port. If you use `web_extra_exposed_ports`, you don't need these files._
```

### 2. Adjust the Vite config

The last step is to adjust the Vite config to let it know that it will run on `https://test-vite.ddev.site:5173`.

This can be done easily by creating a `vite.config.js` file like this: 

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'vite'
import path from 'path'

const port = 5173;
const origin = `${process.env.DDEV_PRIMARY_URL}:${port}`;

// https://vitejs.dev/config/
export default defineConfig({
    // Add entrypoint
    build: {
        // our entry
        rollupOptions: {
          input: path.resolve(__dirname, 'src/main.js'),
        },

        // manifest
        manifest: true
      },

    // Adjust Vites dev server for DDEV
    // https://vitejs.dev/config/server-options.html
    server: {
        // respond to all network requests:
        host: '0.0.0.0',
        port: port,
        strictPort: true, 
        // Defines the origin of the generated asset URLs during development
        origin: origin
    },

})
```

Technical explanation:

- We need to define an entry file to let vite know where to start, this is done in `rollupOptions`. 

> - Also we need to tell vite to respond to all network request, not only the ones addressed to http://localhost:5173. This is done via `host: '0.0.0.0'`. You could also use `true`.

Reviewer: I didn't understand "You could also use `true`" so suggest removing that, it's not clear what it's referring to.
```suggestion
- Also we need to tell vite to respond to all network request, not only the ones addressed to http://localhost:5173. This is done via `host: '0.0.0.0'`. 
```

- The strict port setting is also necessary, because we only exposed port 5173. Without `strictPort: true`, Vite will use other ports like 5174 or 5175 if 5173 is already occupied.
- Another important part is to let Vite know from where to load Vite-controlled assets like images referenced in CSS. This is done via `server.origin`. <br> _(DDEV automatically provides environment variables via the regular `process.env` variable. The variable `process.env.DDEV_PRIMARY_URL` will have the value `https://test-vite.ddev.site` in our demo project. We use it to set the correct `server.origin` dynamically.)_

> See Vites [Server Options](https://vitejs.dev/config/server-options.html) for all settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See Vite's [Server Options](https://vitejs.dev/config/server-options.html) for all settings.
```

```php
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">

<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
    <title>Hello Vite!</title>

    <!-- This is just an example for local development, no full integration: -->
    <script type="module" src="<?php echo $_SERVER['DDEV_PRIMARY_URL']; ?>:5173/@vite/client"></script>
    <script type="module" src="<?php echo $_SERVER['DDEV_PRIMARY_URL']; ?>:5173/src/main.js"></script>
    <!-- see https://vitejs.dev/guide/backend-integration.html -->

</head>

<body>
    <h1>Hello, Vite!</h1>
    <p>This is a simple test for hot module reloading.</p>
</body>

</html>
```

Run `ddev launch` to open https://test-vite.ddev.site/ in the browser.

Now we need to start Vite for local development:

```bash
ddev npm run dev
```

Reload the browser. 

If you change something in `style.css` or `main.js` now, you should see the change immediately on the website as well - without a full page reload.

You can also open https://test-vite.ddev.site:5173/@vite/client and https://test-vite.ddev.site:5173/src/main.js to see if Vites dev server is accessible.

### Test with an image

> Vite also optimizes images referenced in CSS. These are also loaded from Vites dev server for local production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vite also optimizes images referenced in CSS. These are also loaded from Vite's dev server for local production.
```

- /dist/assets/main-8811a981.js
- /dist/assets/main-d6825f81.css
- ...

To include these in PHP, you will need to know the hash values. You could set  `build.manifest` to true in Vites config. With this option enabled a `/dist/manifest.json` file is generated on each build, which has reference to all JS and CSS files:

Example:

```
{
  "src/images/ddev.png": {
    "file": "assets/ddev-f877fcaa.png",
    "src": "src/images/ddev.png"
  },
  "src/main.css": {
    "file": "assets/main-d6825f81.css",
    "src": "src/main.css"
  },
  "src/main.js": {
    "assets": [
      "assets/ddev-f877fcaa.png"
    ],
    "css": [
      "assets/main-d6825f81.css"
    ],
    "file": "assets/main-8811a981.js",
    "isEntry": true,
    "src": "src/main.js"
  }
}
```

You could now parse the `dist/manifest.json` file dynamically in PHP and get the hashed filename via `$manifest["src/main.js]` and include it on your production site.

This is the point where PHP libraries and CMS integrations come into play which handle this for us. In most cases, you won't need to write this integration yourself (see below).

### Integrate Vite into a framework / CMS

> You can read Vites official guide for backend integration here: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can read Vite's official guide for backend integration here: 
```

    http_port: 5172
    https_port: 5173
```

A `ddev restart` is necessary afterwards.

The tricky part: 

CMS integrations for Vite can use different approaches. 

Some have official support for Docker and DDEV, others may need a little bit of tweaking. 

### List of CMS integrations

Here is a list of example integrations I know so far. 

_**Did I miss an integration? Please let me know!**_

#### General PHP example

André Felipe has published https://github.com/andrefelipe/vite-php-setup as general example for Vite in PHP projects.

For DDEV you need to change the `const VITE_HOST` to `"".$_SERVER['DDEV_PRIMARY_URL'].":5173"` in `public/helpers.php`. 

Also you might need to change the `isDev()` function. 

#### CraftCMS 

The Vite plugin by nystudio107 has official DDEV support. 

Here is a guide to change `vite.config.js` and `config/vite.php` accordingly: [Using DDEV](https://nystudio107.com/docs/vite/#using-ddev)

_Note: You don't need to use the docker-compose-file for exposing the ports if you already used `web_extra_exposed_ports`._

Example repositories: 

- [mandrasch/ddev-craftcms-vite](https://github.com/mandrasch/ddev-craftcms-vite)

#### Drupal

> I found this plugin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I found this module:
```

- https://www.drupal.org/project/vite

But I could not find more info regarding DDEV usage. Happy to update this section with a better link / suggestion!

#### Laravel

Since June 2022 [Vite is the default bundler for Laravel](https://laravel-news.com/vite-is-the-default-frontend-asset-bundler-for-laravel-applications), replacing Laravel Mix (Webpack).

> Laravels Vite integration is a bit special, because it has its own npm integration with a so called `hot` file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Laravel's Vite integration is a bit special, because it has its own npm integration with a so called `hot` file. 
```
